.\" Man page for lzcomplexity
.\" Contact estevez@fisica.uh.cu or efrenaragon96@gmail.com for corrections.
.TH LZCOMPLEXITY 1 "December 2024" "lzcomplexity 0.9.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lzcomplexity \- compute Lempel-Ziv 76 complexity and entropy measures for symbolic sequences
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lzcomplexity
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIfile\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lzcomplexity
is a high-performance tool for computing entropy and complexity measures of symbolic sequences based on the Lempel-Ziv 76 (LZ76) factorization algorithm.
.PP
The program computes the LZ76 complexity, entropy density, excess entropy by random shuffling, and information distance between sequences. Results are output in JSON format.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-alphabet =\fIvalue\fR
Alphabet cardinality. If auto, it guesses the alphabet size. (default auto).
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-dlz
Calculate the LZ distance between consecutive lines. Only valid when used with the \fB\-m\fR option for multiline files.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-rsemc\-opt =\fI[v1]:[f]:[v2]:[v3]\fR
Random shuffle complexity calculation options:
.RS
.IP \fIv1\fR
Maximum value for block shuffling.
.IP \fIf\fR
Enable summand factors output.
.IP \fIv2\fR
Starting line for RSEMC.
.IP \fIv3\fR
Ending line for RSEMC.
.PP
All values are optional.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-factors =\fIfile_name\fR
Save the LZ76 factorization to the specified file.
.TP
.BR \-F ", " \-\-format =\fIvalue\fR
Input file format. Supported formats:
.RS
.IP \fBTXT\fR
Raw text format (default).
.IP \fBCSV\fR
Comma-separated values.
.IP \fBTSV\fR
Tab/space-separated values.
.IP \fBPBM\fR
Portable Bitmap format.
.IP \fBPGM\fR
Portable Graymap format.
.IP \fBPNM\fR
Portable Anymap format.
.IP \fBAUTO\fR
Automatic format detection.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-jobs =\fIvalue\fR
Number of threads for parallel computation. Default is the number of available CPU cores.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-log\-base =\fIvalue\fR
Logarithm base for entropy calculations. Default is the alphabet cardinality.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-multi\-line
Treat each line in the input file as a separate sequence.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-entropy\-density
Compute only the entropy density (skip shuffle complexity calculations).
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output =\fIfile_name\fR
Output filename for results. Default appends \fI.lz76.json\fR extension to the input filename.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-partitions =\fIvalue\fR
Number of partitions for the parallel suffix array construction algorithm (CaPS). Default is automatically determined.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output showing progress and intermediate results.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-warn\-out
Suppress warning messages.
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
Results are saved in JSON format containing:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBlz76Complexity\fR: The LZ76 factorization complexity (number of factors).
.IP \(bu 2
\fBlz76EntropyDensity\fR: Normalized entropy density estimate.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBlz76RandomShuffleComplexity\fR: Excess entropy estimated by random shuffling.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBlz76Distance\fR: Information distance metrics (when \fB\-d\fR is used).
.SH THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
The LZ76 complexity \fIc(S)\fR of a sequence \fIS\fR of length \fIn\fR is the minimum number of factors in a factorization where each factor is either a new symbol or the longest substring that appeared earlier.
.PP
The normalized entropy density \fIh\fR is estimated as:
.PP
.RS
h ≈ c(S) · log_k(n) / n
.RE
.PP
where \fIk\fR is the alphabet size. This converges to the true entropy rate for ergodic sources as \fIn → ∞\fR.
.SH EXAMPLES
Compute LZ76 complexity for a text file:
.PP
.RS
.B lzcomplexity data.txt
.RE
.PP
Process a multiline file with verbose output:
.PP
.RS
.B lzcomplexity \-m \-v sequences.txt
.RE
.PP
Compute only entropy density using 4 threads:
.PP
.RS
.B lzcomplexity \-n \-j 4 data.txt
.RE
.PP
Process a CSV file and save results to a specific file:
.PP
.RS
.B lzcomplexity \-F csv \-o results.json data.csv
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred (invalid input, file not found, etc.).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I input.lz76.json
Default output file (input filename with .lz76.json extension).
.TP
.I input.log
Log file created when warnings occur.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lzdistance (1)
.SH REFERENCES
.IP 1. 4
Lempel, A., & Ziv, J. (1976). On the complexity of finite sequences. \fIIEEE Transactions on Information Theory\fR, 22(1), 75-81.
.IP 2. 4
Kontoyiannis, I., et al. (1998). Nonparametric entropy estimation for stationary processes and random fields. \fIIEEE Transactions on Information Theory\fR, 44(3), 1319-1327.
.IP 3. 4
Khan, J., et al. (2023). Fast, Parallel, and Cache-Friendly Suffix Array Construction. \fIarXiv:2305.07024\fR.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to estevez@fisica.uh.cu or efrenaragon96@gmail.com.
.SH AUTHORS
Efren Aragon Perez <efrenaragon96@gmail.com>
.br
Ernesto Estevez Rams <estevez@fisica.uh.cu>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2024 Efren Aragon Perez. License: MIT.
