.\" Man page for lzdistance
.\" Contact estevez@fisica.uh.cu or efrenaragon96@gmail.com for corrections.
.TH LZDISTANCE 1 "December 2024" "lzdistance 0.9.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lzdistance \- compute Lempel-Ziv based information distance between symbolic sequences
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lzdistance
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIsource\fR [\fIdestination\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lzdistance
computes the normalized information distance between symbolic sequences using Lempel-Ziv 76 (LZ76) complexity. The program can compare sequences from files or directories and outputs distance matrices in JSON format.
.PP
The information distance is based on the normalized compression distance (NCD), which measures the similarity between sequences using their algorithmic complexity.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-adn
Calculate distance between two sets of DNA sequences.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-binary
Calculate distance between two sets of sequences in binary format.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-default
Calculate distance between two sets of sequences (default mode).
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-factors =\fIfile_name\fR
Save the LZ76 factorization to the specified file.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-first =\fIrange\fR
Range of lines/files to process from the first data source.
.TP
.BR \-I ", " \-\-first\-format =\fIvalue\fR
First data source format. Supported formats: TXT, CSV, PBM, PGM, PNM.
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-jobs =\fIvalue\fR
Number of threads for parallel computation. Default is the number of available CPU cores.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-log\-base =\fIvalue\fR
Logarithm base for entropy calculations. Default is the alphabet cardinality.
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-logs
Enable verbose output showing progress and intermediate results.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output =\fIfile_name\fR
Output filename for results. Default is \fIlz_results.lzdist.json\fR.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-partitions =\fIvalue\fR
Number of partitions for the parallel suffix array construction algorithm.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-reverse
Calculate distance between the first set of sequences and the reverse of the second set.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-second =\fIrange\fR
Range of lines/files to process from the second data source.
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-second\-format =\fIvalue\fR
Second data source format. Supported formats: TXT, CSV, PBM, PGM, PNM.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-text
Calculate distance between two text sequences.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-trajectory
Calculate distance between two sets of trajectories.
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
Results are saved in JSON format containing:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBinformation_distance\fR: Matrix of normalized information distances.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBshuffle_information_distance\fR: Matrix of shuffle-based information distances.
.SH THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
The normalized information distance (NID) between sequences \fIx\fR and \fIy\fR is defined as:
.PP
.RS
d(x,y) = [C(xy) - min(C(x), C(y))] / max(C(x), C(y))
.RE
.PP
where \fIC(x)\fR denotes the LZ76 complexity of sequence \fIx\fR, and \fIC(xy)\fR is the complexity of the concatenation. The distance satisfies 0 ≤ d(x,y) ≤ 1, where 0 indicates identical sequences.
.SH EXAMPLES
Compute distance matrix between sequences in two files:
.PP
.RS
.B lzdistance file1.txt file2.txt
.RE
.PP
Compute distance matrix for all files in a directory:
.PP
.RS
.B lzdistance \-L data_dir/
.RE
.PP
Compare sequences with specific format and output:
.PP
.RS
.B lzdistance \-I csv \-S csv \-o distances.json data1.csv data2.csv
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred (invalid input, file not found, etc.).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I lz_results.lzdist.json
Default output file for distance matrices.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lzcomplexity (1)
.SH REFERENCES
.IP 1. 4
Li, M., et al. (2004). The similarity metric. \fIIEEE Transactions on Information Theory\fR, 50(12), 3250-3264.
.IP 2. 4
Cilibrasi, R., & Vitányi, P. M. (2005). Clustering by compression. \fIIEEE Transactions on Information Theory\fR, 51(4), 1523-1545.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to estevez@fisica.uh.cu or efrenaragon96@gmail.com.
.SH AUTHORS
Efren Aragon Perez <efrenaragon96@gmail.com>
.br
Ernesto Estevez Rams <estevez@fisica.uh.cu>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2024 Efren Aragon Perez. License: MIT.
